all right so last time
we prove the fundamental theorem of
calculus and as a consequence
integration by parts formula and the
change of variables formula or u
substitution so let me just recall for
integration by parts
it was
that if i had two
continuously differentiable functions
then i can shift the burden of taking a
derivative
f prime times g integrate is equal to
f of b
g of b
minus
f of a
g of a
minus the integral from a to b of g
prime f
okay so i can shift that derivative over
to
from f to g
um
and this is
you know apart from
the
triangle inequality probably uh
one of the most useful
theorems that comes out of calculus
other than the fundamental theorem of
calculus
in fact
for those of you who've taken quantum
mechanics which
um i mean
you don't have to but
or you heard of something called the
heisenberg uncertainty principle which
says
something like something to the effect
that you cannot
measure
the position of a particle and its
momentum
to
arbitrarily uh
good degree
you're bound by if you can measure the
position of a particle very well then
your measurement of the momentum is
going to be
um not so great and vice versa
and that's based on
an inequality and how do you prove that
inequality integration by parts so
integration by parts is is
in fact
responsible for
one of the great head scratchers from
quantum mechanics so
just to back up my claim a little bit
um now i'm not going to give that as an
application i'm going to give a
different application
related to fourier series
[Applause]
um
so
the fourier series what are these so
suppose we have a
function and i'm not going to say what
type suppose f
from minus pi to pi
[Applause]
to r is
two pi periodic
[Applause]
and so
um
the question that uh
that arose due to fourier in his study
of um heat transfer
so this is fourier
um i don't know something like 200 years
ago
he made the following claim
that
the function f of x can be expanded
in terms of simpler
building blocks
in terms of simpler functions so
you know we haven't talked about taylor
series we will in just a minute
or power series which you've come into
contact with which is a way of if you'd
like expanding
um
you know a function in terms of
polynomials
and and
now or monomials
now fourier uh
suggested uh
that f x can be expanded as
a superposition of functions which are
two pi periodic
okay
uh and kind of the most basic two pi
periodic functions now what is so
special about sine x and cosine x
um
well
this is a little bit deeper the fact
that they satisfy a certain second order
differential equation
and they are the
all of the solutions to the second order
differential equation uh that are two pi
periodic okay
so you should think of these as as kind
of being building blocks another way to
think of this is
um
you know analogous
to
if you have a vector
right
so now
this is not a partition this is a vector
x1 x2
xn
then you can expand uh
this vector as a sum
of
uh coefficients a sub n
well a sub j
j equals 1 to n
um
you know what let me
make this m
let's make this n let's make this m so
it looks a little
a sub n e sub
n where now e sub n this is the basis
vector
given by uh you know 0
zero
where this is in the
in spot
okay
so you can think of this expansion in
terms of sines and cosines as being
analogous to
um
you know expanding a vector in terms of
basis elements
or you can think of it as a kind of a
different way to expand a function other
than taylor series or power series
okay
but these equip these
you know components arose
in
sort of a natural way if one were to
study the problem of heat transfer which
is governed by
the equation dtu
equals
dx squared u okay and then along with a
initial
condition that
u of 0x so i times 0
equals f of x
okay
so
okay now
just like for um how we expand a vector
into basis elements there's um a formula
for computing these coefficients right
okay so you know they should be
a sub n should be x sub n over here but
what's a different way of
[Applause]
obtaining
these coefficients
so this is a vector in
our
m
[Applause]
and so how do you obtain the
coefficients a sub n well
um if i take the inner product of both
sides
the dot product say of e
x dot uh let's say e sub
n prime
let's say okay so i've used m n let's
say l
this is equal to the sum from
n equals 1 to m
of a sub n
e sub n dot e sub l
now i wrote these basis vectors this way
because that's kind of a standard choice
for rm
and what makes them standard is they
have unit length
and they're
orthogonal to each other okay so they
form an orthonormal basis so
when i take the product of e
sub n with e sub l
i pick up
what is usually referred to as
uh
delta
in l
we're here delta
this is
um one if n equals l and zero if n does
not equal l
and therefore this just reduces to a l
so we see that
a sub l
uh is equal to x dot e
sub l
okay
and this is so all of this discussion
was in the setting of you know a finite
dimensional vector
uh in our m
and expanding in terms of you know the
standard basis here but um you know it
didn't have to be it could have been as
long as it's an orthonormal basis
um
then i get this uh relation that the
coefficient that appears in front of
that vector
is equal to
the thing i'm interested in dotted with
that vector
okay which is written here
so let's say we try and do the same
thing now with f of x except now and say
so these are functions so instead of
taking dot products
uh
which is a sum of you know
components
uh
take an integral
so
if i take
f of x
and
if you like dot it with sine of x and
sum which is you can think of as you
know i said that the integral is you
should think of as maybe a continuous
sum
what do we get assuming that this um
expansion holds this is equal to the sum
from n equals zero so let me make this
l
um this is
the sum from n equals 0 to infinity of a
sub
n sine in
x times sine
so let me
forgetting to write the integrals here
i'm skipping a point i want to make as
well
sum and uh
just remember the sum is starting from 0
to infinity i don't want to keep writing
it a n
sine and x sine lx
plus
bn
cosine nx
sine nlx
sine lx
and then n equals 0 to infinity okay
i'll just write it stop being lazy
now assuming i can do what i'm about to
do and that's actually going to be um
you know a lot of you know the the
motivation for what we're going to
discuss in uh our final chapter
um assuming i can take this infinite sum
and interchange it with this integral
this is the interchanging of two limits
right a sum is an infinite limit an
integration is a limit so assuming i can
switch
these two uh limiting processes
processes
then i pick up a sub n
a sub n minus pi pi
sine
and x
sine and lx
sine lx sorry
plus b sub n integral minus pi to pi
cosine
and x
sine lx
dx
okay
now um
you can actually sit down and and
compute this based on based on uh you
know trigonometric identities
and what you get is that this is always
equal to 0
and that this
here
equals pi times delta
in l
okay
so
this equals the sum from n equals 0 to
infinity
a n
pi delta
n l
which equals pi times
a l okay
all right so we get
this quantity here
is
assuming everything we've done is kosher
equal to pi times a sub l and then to
pick up the b sub l is the same except
now you integrate against cosine of l
uh
x so
similarly
pi times
b sub l is equal to
the integral from minus pi to pi
of
f of x cosine
lx
dx okay
so
so the b sub l's and ace of l's are
referred to as a fourier coefficients
of the function f
so
if f from minus pi to pi
to r
is
continuous
and
2pi periodic
the numbers
a sub n equals
1 over pi integral from minus pi to pi
of
f of x sine n x
dx
b sub n equals 1 over pi integral from
minus pi to pi
f x cosine index
dx are referred to as the fourier
coefficients of f
[Applause]
okay
and so um
just using integration by parts
so
what's the first question one should ask
uh if it's even possible or in what
sense uh does f of x equal this infinite
sum
well we haven't even gotten into that
but you know one question you can ask is
do these coefficients that come in front
of these basic building blocks sign in x
and cosine nx do they converge to zero i
mean if we expect f of x to be
equal to the sum of these basic parts
then
the contributions from each should be
getting smaller and smaller
okay
so does a n and b n tend to 0 as n goes
to infinity
and this is the content of what's
usually referred to as the riemann le
bay lemma
um
but it's uh usually stated in a
different way i'm just going to state it
the way uh
i'm going to state it this way right now
um
[Applause]
and which is the following
if
if f from a b to r
is continuously differentiable
[Applause]
then
limit as n goes to infinity
of a sub n equals the limit as n goes to
infinity a b sub n
equals zero
now the actual way the riemann labeling
limit is typically stated is in fact i
don't need it to be continuously
differentiable i just need it to be
continuous this is still true
but we haven't done
or won't do in this class
approximation theorems for continuous
functions
which says that if you can do this for
continuously differentiable functions
and basically you can do it for
continuous functions
but this will suffice so
so what this says is that
the contributions coming from these
building blocks is getting smaller at
least in the sense that the coefficients
are getting smaller but it says nothing
about if uh
you know that sum up there with the ans
and bn's defined this way actually
converges to f okay i do want to
emphasize that in fact uh
you know trying to straighten out this
question in what sense
this uh series converges to f
um
is really the motivation for a lot of
analysis you know
developed uh
past
you know sort of in the the first
part of the last century and the last
part of the century before that
and
forms the basis of what's called
harmonic analysis
um
which is a really beautiful subject and
still
an active area of ongoing research
um
okay so how do we prove this well i
stated the integration by parts formula
earlier so
in fact it'll follow pretty easily from
that
um
let's uh
prove that the limit as n goes to
infinity of b sub n equals zero the one
for a sub n is similar there's just an
extra piece but i'm gonna be a little
bit lazy and do the easier one
we'll show
okay
okay um
so let's look at b sub n this is equal
to
the integral from minus pi to pi
of f x
and in fact let me write cosine and x
times f of x
dx dx
why am i writing dx dx
and
now what i do is
cosine in x i can write as the
derivative of something
one over n times sine nx
if i take the derivative of that with
respect to x i get cosine in x
okay i didn't actually prove that but
you can
you know uh look back in your calculus
textbooks we've proven enough to be able
to make that uh precise
so by integration by parts i can now
shift the blame or shift the burden of
this derivative onto f but look what
i've gained i've gained a 1 over n here
so now this is equal to
1 over n
sine in pi
f of pi minus
sine
of n
minus pi
times f of pi
minus pi sorry
minus 1 over n
sine
in x minus pi to pi
f prime of x
dx
okay
and really what this computation is
showing is
um
illustrating is the oscillatory nature
of what's going on
right cosine of nx is oscillating as n
gets very large between -1 and 1 and
sort of
um you know equal footing so
on average you're getting the same
amount of positive f as minus as
negative f so
um
or you're weighting f in in
such a way that
it's both positive and negative in equal
amounts
now sine of n pi no matter what n is i
get 0 sine of n minus pi i get 0 so this
first part drops off so this is equal to
minus 1 over n minus pi
pi
sine in x
times f prime of x
dx and therefore
if i take the absolute value of b sub n
this is less than or equal to 1 over n
minus 5 pi
sine in x
f prime of x
dx if i bring the absolute value inside
so
i can bring the absolute value inside
and still
get this so in fact before when i had
the absolute value outside it's an
equality but now it's a less than or
equality
uh
i mean an inequality so
now sine of nx
is always bounded by one so this is less
than or equal to
the integral of f prime of x dx so this
is equal to 1 over n
integral a b
f
now this is just f prime this is just a
fixed number times 1 over n
so this converges to 0
as n goes to infinity and b sub n an
absolute value of course it's always
bigger than or equal to 0 and it's
bounded by something converging to 0 as
n goes to infinity so by
the squeeze theorem
we conclude uh b sub n converges to zero
and that's the proof the uh the
proof for the ace of bins is similar
except now you can't
throw away necessarily uh the end points
but it's still not not a very big deal
okay
and in fact if we have time i'll show
you how much
so in fact um
you know one can prove and this is
proven in you know
classes on uh
courses on harmonic analysis that
in fact for a function which is
continuously differentiable um
this and two pi periodic this uh series
actually does converge uniformly to f
um
on
this interval and i haven't even said
what uniform convergence means but
actually does converge to the function f
of x
okay so this is this is
um the case
um for
continuously differentiable functions
i'll give a proof
later that in fact
this series converges uh if f is twice
continuously differentiable we can
actually do that using
um
the fundamental the um
integration by parts again essentially
but
so
but you know there are a few things here
that that are
behind the scene that i kind of swept
away first off
um
you know when we computed these formulas
formulae i guess um
we interchange summation infinite
summation of functions with integration
when can we do that you know
in what sense does uh
if the seri if this uh fourier series
converges
in what sense does it converge to f you
know
for convergence of
real numbers there was just one sense of
the convergence of real numbers now when
we have a sequence of functions which is
now what we're going to turn to
we'll have different notions of
convergence to another function
and depending on
you know in what sense uh that
conversion that uh
uh convergence takes place
some of these limiting operations may
not
uh interchange
okay so now we're gonna move on to the
the final
chapter of this class
and i know it seems like you know we're
kind of hitting a lot of different
things now towards the end of the class
and
we took it slow during the first part of
class but that's like i said that's i
think i even said this at the start of
class we didn't have very much to go off
of
uh we built things from the ground up
and the more
technology you have the more things you
can prove the more interesting questions
you can ask
so now we're going to go on to sequences
of functions
and you could also put sequences in
series because a series is just a
special type of a
sequence of functions
so
you know i
motivated a little bit of uh
you know
why we would be interested in um
you know functions converging to other
functions or sequences of functions
converging to
a function
but you know we could look at something
much more basic so let's look at take a
step back and look at power series okay
and this should be thought of as
motivation for
what's to come just uh like our
discussion about fourier series
okay
and again i'm
you know not gonna ask any deep
questions about fourier series on the
homework or on the exam so you know a
lot of this is just
uh this discussion was to
um
motivate this theorem here
uh
but now i'm gonna make uh um
you know kind of a more
um
precise motivation i guess for what's to
come so
although
we've had series forever i never brought
a power series and it's for a reason
it's because i didn't think they
belonged anywhere until we got to
sequences of functions so a power series
[Applause]
about a point x naught
is a series of the form
sum from
j equals 0 to infinity
of
a sub j x minus x naught
to the j
okay so the x naught is given
um and
you know the things that could change
are the coefficients or this number x
here
okay
so theorem
which immediately follows from
essentially the
root test
suppose this number r
which is the limit as
j goes to infinity of a sub j
1 over j
exists so it's a it's a
finite number positive non-negative
number
and define
rho to be
1 over r
if r is bigger than 0
and
infinity r equals zero
then
we have the following conclusion
that
this power series a sub j
converges
absolutely
if
x minus x naught is less than rho
and diverges
if x minus x not an absolute value is
bigger than rho
okay
and this number row we refer to as
radius of convergence
okay
so
again the proof follows immediately from
[Music]
the root test because if we take
limit as
j goes to infinity
of a sub j absolute value x minus x
naught
j
one over j this is equal to
uh
x minus x naught
this kills that j this is just a fixed
number so this pops out
of the limit
[Applause]
and this limit exists so
this equals x minus x naught
times r
okay
and
we have two things happening this is
less than one
if
x minus x naught is less than rho
bigger than one
if x minus x naught is bigger than rho
okay this number here
and therefore by
the root test
the theorem holds
okay
so
we see that this series
where the
if you like the what's given are the
coefficients a sub j and x naught and
what could change is x
um that the series converges as long as
x minus x naught is less than rho so as
long as we stay
um
excuse me
as long as we stay in that interval a
symmetric interval about x naught then
this series converges
absolutely
okay so we can define a function where
if i take
x in this interval stick it into this
series i get out a number so
define function f now going from this
interval so
x naught minus rho
x 9 plus rho
to r
by
f of x equals
the number that gets uh spat out by this
um
power series on the j there
okay
so for example
what is f of x
let's say i take all of the coefficients
to be
uh
let's say x naught is zero and all the
coefficients are one so
let's say i look at
sum of x sub j then f of x
so we've already computed for a
geometric series this is equal to 1 over
1 minus x
for x and minus 1 1.
okay
so
in this simple setting 1 over 1 minus x
is equal x to the j
you know another example is
that if i take
a sub j equals one over j factorial x
naught equals zero
then
you've done this in an exercise that
this
series here
converges absolutely for all
x
meaning
rho equals infinity
[Applause]
and
this is how we define the exponential
function
exponential function exponential of x
to be what
comes out of this series
and then simply from this definition you
know you can show things that uh
an exponential function should satisfy
you know x
the x e to the n is equal to n
e to the e of 1
to the nth power and so on and so on so
that this really does
obey what you believe an exponential
function should look like
and
also it grows faster than any power of x
as x goes to infinity it goes to zero
those types of things
but this is how the exponential function
is defined
um so
okay we have these functions this
function that's defined by
um whatever this power series spits out
for x inside this uh
uh interval of uh convergence
so
so then i could write f of x
as the limit as n goes to infinity
of a sequence of functions because this
is just how it's defined
where
fn of x is
the partial sum
okay it's just a polynomial right
so
uh for power series the limiting
function
uh you can write it as the limit of the
partial sums which are just polynomials
okay
um
and
so
i should say for all x in this interval
we have this
okay so now
some questions arise
so what this function is equal to the
limit of these
maybe simpler functions these simpler
functions are just polynomials for the
case of power series
so like i said 1 over 1 minus x is equal
to the limit of these polynomials some
some questions should arise i mean
analysis is about limits
you can think of that as half the story
first off what
what is the limit what are the
you know important limiting processes
that
we consider the second question is
how do different limits interact
so let's uh
let's pose that as a question now
for a
three-parted question for power series
and this will motivate and this is again
motivating all of what we're going to be
doing now
so
you know
is the function
uh that i get as this limit of
polynomials as the
you know output from a power series is
it continuous okay the individual pieces
that i take a limit to get f of x you
know these polynomials the partial sums
are certainly continuous they're just
polynomials so is the limiting thing
continuous
now
if so
um
is f
differentiable
and in particular since f is equal to
the limit as n goes to infinity of the
fns
is f prime equal to the limit as n goes
to infinity of
the fn prime
okay
so you know the derivative is a limiting
process so
i'm taking the derivative of the limit
so i'm asking can i take that derivative
inside the limit can i swap the two
uh processes
and the same with integration
if one
does
the integral of f equal
limit as n goes to infinity of
the integrals of the fns
okay
all right
so again this is a limiting process that
we're asking
us to flip because f is equal to the
limit as n goes to infinity of f n and
what i'm asking is can i take this
integral
inside that limit
okay um
all right
now you can ask these questions not just
for power series but uh in a more
general setting which is what we're
going to turn to now um
but this should be in the back of your
mind as as the motivation for what we're
doing
okay
and you know
apart from being just an academic
question i mean it
apart from being an academic uh
question
it's also somehow you know giving you
information over whether the formal
manipulations that you're doing with
fourier series that are actually you
know
somehow modeling some physical
phenomenon are these formal
manipulations even meaningful
so
um
these are the three questions that
motivate what we're going to do going
forward
but
we don't have to just stick to the
setting of being uh
in
power series this should be a you know
kind of
very important example of
you know function a sequence of
functions converging to a function
a limiting function
and then we can ask these questions but
we don't have to just stick to power
series so let me
move on to a more general
setting in which we'll answer these
three questions
and two modes of convergence
for limits of functions or sequences of
uh functions
so
first definition this is
in fact
um
you know what we showed uh or what we
were talking about before
um for
in natural number
let fn be
a function from s to r s is some
non-empty subset of the real numbers
and let f
be from s to r
we say
fn
so the sequence of functions fn
converges
pointwise
to the function f
if
for all x and s
if i stick in x into s
so for each fixed x and s
if i stick this into fn of x i get a
limit and this limit is f of x
all right
so for example going back to um
uh power series you know if we defined f
of x
so
let me just rewrite that example that i
had up there
if i define f of x equals 1 over 1 minus
x
f n of x to be
sum from
j equals 0 to n of x j
then
for all x and minus one to one
limit as n goes to infinity of f n of x
equals f of x i e
this
the sequence of partial sums of
corresponding to this power series
converges to one over one minus x
point wise
okay
on minus one one
so i said whenever you come across a
definition you should negate it but the
negation of this definition is not to
not too difficult
a sequence of functions does not
converge to another function
uh point wise if there exists some point
so that when i stick them into fn of x
uh
f n of x does not converge to f of x
[Applause]
so let's look at another example which
is not a power series
let's say
we take fn of x to be
x to the n
where
x is in the closed interval 0 1.
okay so what's happening here is n gets
very large
there's
one one
there's i don't know f5 of x and then as
n gets very large these guys are
dropping down even more
and more
and
what is uh
are we picking up something in the limit
well let's look
uh
well if x equals
and it's pretty clear that the limit as
n goes to infinity of fn of
1 this equals 1. right if i stick in 1
here i get 1 for all n
and therefore the limit as n goes to
infinity of fn of 1 is 1.
now if x is in
0 1
then
i mean we've done this
[Applause]
limit before limit as n goes to infinity
of f n of x this is equal to
the limit as n goes to infinity of x to
the n now x is less than one so x is
being raised to a higher and higher
power this equals zero
okay
thus
what do we conclude
for all
x and 0 1
this sequence of functions x to the n
converges
point wise to the function f of x
which is equal to 0
if
x is in
0 1
and 1
if x equals 1
right
so
i draw another picture here
of what the limit looks like
right
and you can kind of start to see this as
n gets large again this is becoming more
vertical there but then going to zero
so
for any fixed end it's converging to
this picture on the right
all right and so you know we can already
pick up something
or at least answer you know one of these
questions if we take them as you know
um
as a question about convergence or
functions in the pointwise sense
so we could have asked this question now
right after having this definition
suppose fns are continuous converging
point wise to a function f
is the function f continuous and what
this definite and what this example
shows is that no that's not the case
right
x to the n is always continuous
yet the limit as n goes to infinity the
pointwise limit is given by this
function which is zero
from zero to one and one at x equals one
which is not a continuous function
okay
so already you know we're kind of seeing
that point wise convergence which is you
know this first uh weakest mode of
convergence um
that we
as of now can say about uh
power series and
is not good enough to ensure that the
limit is even continuous because this
example shows that we have a sequence of
continuous functions whose point-wise
limit is not continuous
okay
um
[Applause]
so as another uh
example you should always
i like this kind of last
chapter because you can draw a lot of
pictures
so
i'm going to draw
pictures of fn so it's piecewise linear
okay
so
you know i could write down what the
function is but i don't want to i'm just
going to draw pictures so f n of x
from 0 1 to r
this is how it looks
so there's one
one
and what i do is i go to the point one
over n
and the function f n of x is zero
up until then
and then it's a linear function
connecting one over n to 2 in here
and then it's
connects this point 2 and 0 so or i
should say 1 over 2 and
2n
connects that to the origin okay so
that's f sub n of x
all right it's just piecewise linear so
for example
if i wanted to draw
f1 f1 would look like
there's one zero
two
one half
and let's say i wanted to draw f 100
what does that look like
so maybe i should make this one a little
bit bigger there's one
one over a hundred
and then that should be
one over two hundred
and then if i go
up to two hundred
this piecewise linear function
which is
you know
getting
um
you know it's it's zero from one up to
one over a hundred so it's zero most of
the time and it's zero at
uh the origin but in this in between
it's very tall and very slim
okay
um
okay and so
my claim is that
that
for all x and zero one
limit as n goes to infinity
of f n of x
equals 0.
okay so this sequence of functions
converges point wise
to
0.
okay
all right so why is this
well let's just give a
full proof of this rather than me
talking it out
i mean i'll talk it out and
give a full proof
okay so
let's look at the easiest spot first um
and i don't even need uh
the formula for these guys i just need
to know you know that they have this
basic characteristic that they're
pointwise linear i mean that they're
piecewise linear uh connecting 0 to
1 over 2n 2n here and then down to 10 uh
1 over n0 and then they're 0 between
that and 1.
so first off if x equals 0
then all these functions are
0 at the origin
so they equal 0 so that equals 0. so
that's that's fine so now suppose
x is in
1. okay
and so what do we want to show
we want to show limit as
n goes to infinity of f n of x
equals 0.
and here so what's the point here
now
um
there's one there's x
so i have to give uh
well
um i'm not even gonna do an epsilon
delta epsilon m argument i'm just going
to show you what happens
so there's x
between 0 and 1.
now let's choose a very large integer
[Applause]
so that one over m is less than x
all right so here's one over m
strictly to the left of x
all right
now what does the graph of fn of x look
like
for n bigger than or equal to m it's 0
from x equals 1 to x equal
1 over m and then you know shoots up and
then comes back down
over here to zero but here's the point
it's zero all the way from one to one
over m so in particular at x
f n of x is zero
okay so
if i look at
this sequence fn of x which i'm trying
to show converges to 0
it is 0 no it is uh f1 of x
f2 of x
up to
fn minus 1 of x
and then at f m of x
so
at the
now so this is f
m of x spot
it's zero
and this point is only going to the left
so for all n bigger than or equal to m
now this will be one over n will be to
the left of x and therefore
uh
f n of x will be zero so this is zero
zero
zero and so on
okay
so i have the sequence
uh is eventually zero
for all n bigger than or equal to
capital m
so
and therefore the limit i mean it's
pretty easy to take a limit of a
constant sequence
and which proves that
this sequence of functions
converges point wise to zero
now i didn't come up with this fancy
example for
just any old reason it'll come back in a
minute when we start answering some of
these questions or asking them
again within uh the context of these two
um convergence
um
you know ways of converging
so so far i've only given you one
definition of convergence point wise
convergence of a sequence of functions
and now i'm going to give a slightly i'm
going to give a stronger it's not
slightly it's much stronger
definition of
convergence of a sequence of functions
so
we have a sequence of functions and a
given function from s to r s is a
non-empty subset of r
then
you say the sequence
f n
uh point wise
or uniformly to zero
uniformly to zero uniformly to
scene of a day if i start
you know mixing up some of my words i'm
always going to correct it but the first
word out of my mouth may not be the
correct one
converges uniformly
to f of x
to f
if
now we have an epsilon n statement
for all epsilon positive there exists an
m
natural number
such that
for all n bigger than or equal to m
for all x and s
f n of x
minus f of x
is less than epsilon
okay
now i want to make a
brief comment this looks suspiciously
like pointwise convergence if you just
wrote down what it means
for
the limit as n goes to infinity of fn of
x goes to f of x
except there's a very
subtle and important point and that is
where does the for all x and s appear
okay for pointwise convergence
you can state pointwise convergence as
this being at the start of the line for
all x and s
for all epsilon z uh positive blah blah
blah okay
here
it appears at the end of the line of the
quantifiers okay and this has a very
this makes a very important difference
between pointwise convergence and
uniform convergence point wise
convergence means i take a point x i
stick it into fn of x that gives me a
sequence of numbers
and pointwise convergence says that
sequence of numbers converges to f of x
okay for each x i get a sequence of
numbers which converges to f of x
okay
now uniform convergence is actually
saying something stronger and i'll say
that uh
so let me
in fact let me draw a picture that goes
that goes with this definition okay
let's let's make
s to be an interval
let's say my limiting function is f
is given given by this graph
and
so
what i'm going to do is
basically shift
[Applause]
the graph
up
and down
[Applause]
uh
by epsilon okay
meaning
this length is epsilon and so is this
length
all the way across so let me shade this
in
and
re-outline
oh
okay
so i get this little if you like uh
shaded area
around
my function f so
this is f
f x that's the graph and the shaded part
this is the set of all x and y such that
f of x minus y
is less than epsilon
okay so i get a little tube snaking with
f
all right
now what uniform convergence says is
that for all n
bigger than or equal to some m so given
epsilon for all n bigger than or equal
to m if i were to draw the graph of f n
of x
it better fall inside this tube
across all of a b
see this tube is defined for all
x between a b so
you know it's making a statement about
how close f n
of x is to f of x across the entire set
all right
pointwise convergence just says if i put
an x into fn of x and eventually that
number is those numbers are getting
close to f of x uniform convergence is
is a global property it's saying across
the entire set
as n is getting large the graph of this
fn is getting very close to the graph of
f of x okay not just if i fixed an x
the fn of x at that point are converging
to f of x
so i've said a couple of times that
uniform convergence is stronger than
point wise convergence let me actually
[Applause]
prove this now
so let me prove that
the following theorem
so if i have a sequence of functions
from s to r
and
fn
rather than write converges to f point
wise or uniformly i'm going to put an
arrow
and then with the the
description afterwards
uniformly on s
and then this implies fn converges to f
point wise
on s
okay
so it's very simple
again what is
the picture that's going on for uniform
convergence is that f n is getting close
to f across the entire
uh set that we're looking at so
certainly at one point which is all you
need for point wise convergence each
fixed point we should be getting close
so
um
let epsilon be positive so first off
let's fix a number
and in the set s
so now we want to prove that
the limit as n goes to infinity of f n
of c equals f of c
let epsilon be positive
since
fn converges to f
uniformly uniformly there exists a
natural number m naught
[Applause]
such that
for all n bigger than or equal to m
naught
for all x and s fn of x
minus f x
is less than epsilon
so choose
m to be this m
naught the m that is for this epsilon
then
we're all in
bigger than or equal to m
let's call this equation star
star
with
at the single point x equals at c
implies
fn of c minus f of c
is less than epsilon
and thus the limit as n goes to infinity
of f of c f n of c equals f c
so i don't think i have enough time to
do the example
that i want to do so i'm just going to
leave you on the edge of your seat by
stating the following theorem that in
fact
so this is a one-way street meaning
point-wise convergence
does not imply uniform convergence so we
just proved uniform implies point-wise
but the converse does not hold and what
we'll prove next time is for in the
setting of uh
you know this simple um
example of x to the end so
and so what we'll prove next time
is the following
if i take any b
between 0 and 1
then
f n converges to f
uniformly on the set 0 b
okay so these functions are defined on
zero one so they're certainly defined on
zero b for b less than one
okay
but
however
the sequence of functions does not
converge
uniformly
to f
on
zero one
okay
so here you know
this second part since the fn's converge
to f point wise on zero one the second
part says that this is a one-way street
this is not
a two-way street these two
modes of convergence uniform convergence
and point-wise are not equivalent
all right i think we'll stop there